Add debugging with .NET documentation (#56)
canonical/ubuntu-for-developers-docs: docs/tutorials/dotnet-use.md

dotnet HelloWorld.dll
```

This directory also contains a `HelloWorld` file. This is a wrapper that is able to search for a compatible .NET runtime on the target system and use that to invoke the `HelloWorld.dll` binary. So, you can also run your application just by executing:

```none
HelloWorld
```

> Finally, there is also a file called `HelloWorld.pdb` available in the publish directory. This is the {ref}`PDB debug symbol file<pdb-files>` for your application, which is not a required file to run the application, but is useful when an error happens and you need to debug your code.

Reviewer: **nitpick:** missing space between the link text and destination
```suggestion
Finally, there is also a file called `HelloWorld.pdb` available in the publish directory. This is the {ref}`PDB debug symbol file <pdb-files>` for your application, which is not a required file to run the application, but is useful when an error happens and you need to debug your code.
```

## Debugging the .NET project

The .NET tooling does not include a debugger; therefore, to debug a .NET application, you need to either use a development environment that includes a .NET debugger, such as Visual Studio Code or JetBrains Rider (see {ref}`setting-up-dotnet-ide` for a list of available development environments for .NET), or install a compatible standalone debugger, such as the open-source [Samsung .NET debugger](https://github.com/Samsung/netcoredbg).

Regardless of your choice, once you learn to use a debugger in one environment, the knowledge should transfer to whichever other environment you might encounter in the future. For the purposes of this tutorial, we will walk through how to use the .NET debugger available in Visual Studio Code.

### Preparing a debugging session

First, install Visual Studio Code.

```none
sudo snap install --classic code
```

Open the Hello World project created in the previous steps with Visual Studio Code by running the following command from within the project root directory.

```none
code .
```

> Make sure to have the C# language support extension installed to have access to the debugger.

Author: Yeah, we could probably use tabs to have a C# version and an F# version. But I agree, sounds like a separate PR.

```csharp
var names = new List<string> { "Alice", "Bob", "Charlie" };
var index = 0;

while (index < names.Count)
{
    index++; 
    Console.WriteLine($"Hello, {names[index]}");
}
```

Our goal with this piece of code is to build a list of names – Alice, Bob, and Charlie – then greet each one with “Hello” within the `while` loop. However, running this code shows that it is not working as expected:

```{terminal}
:dir: ~/HelloWorld
:user: dev
:host: ubuntu
:input: dotnet run
Hello, Bob
Hello, Charlie
Unhandled exception. System.ArgumentOutOfRangeException: Index was out of range. Must be non-negative and less than the size of the collection. (Parameter 'index')
   at System.Collections.Generic.List`1.get_Item(Int32 index)
   at Program.<Main>$(String[] args) in /home/ubuntu/HelloWorld/Program.cs:line 8
```

Two problems appeared:

1. The first name of the list, Alice, is skipped, followed by a `Hello, Bob`, then `Hello, Charlie`.
2. An unhandled exception of type `System.ArgumentOutOfRangeException` happens. According to the error message, we are trying to access an index that does not exist in the collection.

> Let’s debug.

Reviewer 2: -1 Let's not (change from the period to an excl. mark). Exclamation marks and other 'emotive' punctuation/words are good for blog posts or marketing materials. Regular docs do better without.

> Let’s debug.

Reviewer: Okay makes sense, marking this as resolved.

Let’s set a breakpoint at `Console.WriteLine` on line 12. Make sure to disable {guilabel}`Just My Code` in your debug launcher; otherwise, the debugger would not step into framework code. To do that, add `"justMyCode": false` to your `launch.json` profile.

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/12-disable-justmycode.png
   :alt: The launch profile is open with the line disabling JustMyCode highlighted
```

Now, run the debugger.

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/13-writeline-breakpoint.png
   :alt: The debugger steps into SayHello and lands in the WriteLine function call
```

If we step **into** that function, or {kbd}`F11`, we go into the `Concat` function implementation, which is responsible for joining our `Hello, ` string with the `name` variable.

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/14-concat.png
   :alt: The debugger steps into the first line of the Concat function of .NET
```

> Let’s go ahead and step out of this function, since we want to look into the implementation of `Console.WriteLine` instead. Click {guilabel}`Step Out`, or {kbd}`Shift + F11`, and the debugger takes us back to `Console.WriteLine` again – stepping out means “execute the rest of this function and go back to where its value is returned”.

Reviewer: **issue:** Something weird is going on in the rendered output:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8e3886f5-ecdf-4a79-8039-1cea83ac38b0)

**suggestion:** a simple fix that comes to my mind would be:
```suggestion
Let’s go ahead and step out of this function, since we want to look into the implementation of `Console.WriteLine` instead. Click {guilabel}`Step Out`, or {kbd}`Shift` + {kbd}`F11`, and the debugger takes us back to `Console.WriteLine` again – stepping out means “execute the rest of this function and go back to where its value is returned”.
```

Reviewer 2: Oops, apologies. The right way is to lose the blank space:
```suggestion
Let’s go ahead and step out of this function, since we want to look into the implementation of `Console.WriteLine` instead. Click {guilabel}`Step Out`, or {kbd}`Shift+F11`, and the debugger takes us back to `Console.WriteLine` again – stepping out means “execute the rest of this function and go back to where its value is returned”.
```
This renders as expected:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3d9b22f4-c54f-4669-ab59-fe1019db2ed2)

Author: Argh, sorry I didn't notice this. Fixing.

```none
HelloWorld
```

## Debug the .NET project

> The .NET tooling does not include a debugger; therefore, to debug a .NET application, you will need to either install a supported Code Editor, like Visual Studio Code, or an IDE, like JetBrains Rider, which includes a .NET debugger (see {ref}`setting-up-dotnet-ide` for a list of available code editors and IDEs for .NET).

Author: Yeah, I changed this paragraph a bit and replaced Code Editors/IDEs with "development environments". If you think there's a better term, I'm open to it.

I've also added a mention to the Samsung CLI .NET debugger, which is also a possibility and not exactly tied to an IDE.

var index = 0;

while (index < names.Count)
{
    index++; 
    Console.WriteLine($"Hello, {names[index]}");
}
```

Our goal with this piece of code is to build a list of names – Alice, Bob, and Charlie – then greet each one with “Hello” within the `while` loop. However, running this code shows that it is not working as expected:

```{terminal}
:dir: ~/HelloWorld
:user: dev
:host: ubuntu
:input: dotnet run
Hello, Bob
Hello, Charlie
Unhandled exception. System.ArgumentOutOfRangeException: Index was out of range. Must be non-negative and less than the size of the collection. (Parameter 'index')
   at System.Collections.Generic.List`1.get_Item(Int32 index)
   at Program.<Main>$(String[] args) in /home/ubuntu/HelloWorld/Program.cs:line 8
```

A couple problems appeared:

1. We see that the first name of the list, Alice, is skipped, followed by a “Hello, Bob”, then “Hello, Charlie”.
2. Right after that, an unhandled exception of type `System.ArgumentOutOfRangeException` happens. According to the error message, we are trying to access an index that does not exist in the collection.

Let’s debug.

### Debug the .NET application with Visual Studio Code

> To debug a .NET application with Visual Studio Code, we need to create a launch profile. VS Code can create one automatically by clicking on the “Run and Debug” icon, then on the “Run and Debug” button, and selecting the “.NET 5+ and .NET Core” item from the menu that pops up.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To debug a .NET application with Visual Studio Code, we need to create a launch profile. VS Code can create one automatically by clicking the {gui}`Run and Debug` icon, then the {gui}`Run and Debug` button, and selecting the {gui}`.NET 5+ and .NET Core` item from the menu that pops up.
```

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/02-create-debug-profile.png
   :alt: Screenshot displaying how to create a debug profile for .NET
```

> With a launch profile created, go back to the “Run and Debug” section and click on the little Play icon to start debugging the application. You will see that the exception is thrown on line 8, during the `Console.WriteLine` call.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With a launch profile created, go back to the {gui}`Run and Debug` section and click the little {gui}`Play` icon to start debugging the application. You will see that the exception is thrown on line 8, during the `Console.WriteLine` call.
```

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/03-exception-thrown.png
   :alt: A debugger notification showing an ArgumentOutOfRangeException thrown
```

> By analyzing the “Variables” window, we can see that the `names` variable has three items, but our index variable is already at 3. In .NET, arrays are indexed starting at 0, which means that the current index is one unit larger than the collection size. That explains the `ArgumentOutOfRangeException` being thrown.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By analyzing the {gui}`Variables` window, we see that the `names` variable has three items, but our index variable is already at 3. In .NET, arrays are indexed starting at 0, which means that the current index is one unit larger than the collection size. That explains the `ArgumentOutOfRangeException` being thrown.
```

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/04-variables-analysis.png
   :alt: A debugger session highlighting the name variable contains 3 elements and index has value 3
```

> The issue is that we are incrementing the index variable *before* accessing the names collection. Since the index variable is first assigned to 0, the first increment brings it to 1, making the program greet names starting from the second one -- this is a classic [off-by-one error](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Off-by-one_error). We can easily fix this by moving `index++` one line down. Running the program again shows no errors:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The issue is that we are incrementing the index variable *before* accessing the names collection. Since the index variable is first assigned to 0, the first increment brings it to 1, making the program greet names starting from the second one -- this is a classic [off-by-one error](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Off-by-one_error). We fix this by moving `index++` one line down. Running the program again shows no errors:
```

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/05-program-fixed.png
   :alt: A highlight that the program exited successfully with exit code 0
```

> #### Step over code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Stepping over code
```

Another great use of debuggers is the ability to step through code line by line. This is possible by setting breakpoints in the code. A breakpoint indicates to the debugger that, when running the program, it should pause execution at that specific line. This is especially useful when you, as the developer, want to understand the behavior of your code at one specific point.

> To set a breakpoint in Visual Studio Code, simply hover the mouse over the blank space to the left of the line numbers and click on the line you want to set the breakpoint in. A red dot should appear indicating that a breakpoint is now set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To set a breakpoint in Visual Studio Code, hover the mouse over the blank space to the left of the line numbers and click the line you want to set the breakpoint in. A red dot should appear indicating that a breakpoint is now set.
```

Let's go ahead and set a breakpoint on line 6.

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/06-breakpoint-set.png
   :alt: A breakpoint is set on the line that contains the WriteLine function
```

> Now, running the debugger should pause the execution of the program whenever it hits that specific line of code. You can analyze current variable values in the “Variables” window, see the call stack of the program at that specific line in the “Call Stack” window, and so on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, running the debugger should pause the execution of the program whenever it hits that specific line of code. You can analyze current variable values in the {gui}`Variables` window, see the call stack of the program at that specific line in the {gui}`Call Stack` window, and so on.
```

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/07-breakpoint-hit.png
   :alt: The debugger hits the line containing the WriteLine function due to the breakpoint set
```

> Clicking on the “Step Over” icon, or F10, should also let you execute the code line by line and watch how the program behaves in “slow motion”. For example, let’s step over the `Console.WriteLine` instruction, which should print out “Hello, Alice” to the output console.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clicking the {gui}`Step Over icon, or pressing {kbd}`F10`, should also let you execute the code line by line and watch how the program behaves in “slow motion”. For example, let’s step over the `Console.WriteLine` instruction, which should print `Hello, Alice` to the output console.
```

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/08-first-step-over.png
   :alt: The debugger goes to the next line after stepping over the WriteLine function and printing out "Hello, Alice"
```

The index variable holds the value 0 at that specific point in time. Stepping over the variable increment instruction on line 7 should now bring `index` to 1.

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/09-index-step-over.png
   :alt: The debugger steps over the index increment instruction, setting its value to 1
```

> To continue execution as usual, click on the “Continue” button, or F5, and the program should now execute until it hits the next breakpoint. As we’ve set one inside the `while` loop, it will stop again at the next iteration. You can remove the breakpoint by clicking on the red dot again, then click “Continue” to let the program resume and finish execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To continue execution as usual, click the {gui}`Continue` button, or {kbd}`F5`, and the program should now execute until it hits the next breakpoint. As we’ve set one inside the `while` loop, it stops again at the next iteration. To remove the breakpoint, clicking the red dot again, then click {gui}`Continue` to let the program resume and finish execution.
```

> #### Step into code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Stepping into code
```

> Another feature of debuggers is the ability to step into functions as they are called. As an example, let’s create a function called `SayHello`, which prints out a greeting for whichever name is passed in as a parameter. Then, instead of calling `Console.WriteLine` from within the `while` loop, we’ll call `SayHello`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another feature of debuggers is the ability to step into functions as they are called. As an example, let’s create a function called `SayHello`, which prints a greeting for whichever name is passed as a parameter. Then, instead of calling `Console.WriteLine` from within the `while` loop, we call `SayHello`.
```

```csharp
var names = new List<string> { "Alice", "Bob", "Charlie" };
var index = 0;

while (index < names.Count)
{
    SayHello(names[index]);
    index++;
}

void SayHello(string name)
{
    Console.WriteLine($"Hello, {name}");
}
```

Setting a breakpoint on line 6 should allow us to pause the execution right before calling the `SayHello` function.

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/10-breakpoint-sayhello.png
   :alt: The SayHello function is created and a breakline is set where it is called
```

> Now, instead of stepping **over** this line, we will step **into** it by clicking on “Step Into”, or F11, which should allow us to go into the `SayHello` function and step over its implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, instead of stepping **over** this line, we step **into** it by clicking {gui}`Step Into`, or {kbd}`F11`, which should allow us to go into the `SayHello` function and step over its implementation.
```

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/11-first-step-into-01.png
   :alt: The debugger pauses on SayHello and the step into button is highlighted
```

> #### Step into .NET code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Stepping into .NET code
```

When debugging, stepping into functions within your own code is straightforward, as the debugger has direct access to the source. However, stepping into functions from external libraries or .NET itself requires debug symbols, specifically {ref}`pdb-files`.

> This is the case if you want to step into `Console.WriteLine` itself, for example. Clicking on “Step Into” when the debugger hits that line will simply step over it, as the debugger does not have the necessary symbols for the library that provides that function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the case if you want to step into `Console.WriteLine` itself, for example. Clicking {gui}`Step Into` when the debugger hits that line simply steps over it, as the debugger does not have the necessary symbols for the library that provides that function.
```

> However, if you install .NET from the Ubuntu archive packages, you can also install matching {ref}`.NET debug symbols packages<dotnet-debug-symbols-packages>` that contain PDB files for the .NET SDK, Runtime, and ASP\.NET Core Runtime. With these packages installed, debuggers will be able to step into functions defined within .NET itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, if you install .NET from the Ubuntu archive packages, you can also install matching {ref}`.NET debug symbols packages<dotnet-debug-symbols-packages>` that contain PDB files for the .NET SDK, Runtime, and ASP\.NET Core Runtime. With these packages installed, debuggers are able to step into functions defined within .NET itself.
```

> Let’s set a breakpoint at `Console.WriteLine` on line 12. Make sure to disable “Just My Code” in your debug launcher; otherwise, the debugger will not step into framework code. To do that, simply add `”justMyCode”: false` to your `launch.json` profile.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let’s set a breakpoint at `Console.WriteLine` on line 12. Make sure to disable {gui}`Just My Code` in your debug launcher; otherwise, the debugger wiould not step into framework code. To do that, add `"justMyCode": false` to your `launch.json` profile.
```

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/12-disable-justmycode.png
   :alt: The launch profile is open with the line disabling JustMyCode highlighted
```

Now, run the debugger.

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/13-writeline-breakpoint.png
   :alt: The debugger steps into SayHello and lands in the WriteLine function call
```

> If we step **into** that function, or F11, we will go into the `Concat` function implementation, which is responsible for joining our `Hello, ` string with the `name` variable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we step **into** that function, or {kbd}`F11`, we go into the `Concat` function implementation, which is responsible for joining our `Hello, ` string with the `name` variable.
```

```{figure} /images/debug-dotnet/14-concat.png
   :alt: The debugger steps into the first line of the Concat function of .NET
```

> Let’s go ahead and step out of this function, since we want to look into the implementation of `Console.WriteLine` instead. Click “Step Out”, or Shift + F11, and the debugger takes us back to `Console.WriteLine` again – stepping out means “execute the rest of this function and go back to where its value is returned”. Now, “Step Into” it again, and the debugger should take us right to the implementation of the `WriteLine` function itself. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let’s go ahead and step out of this function, since we want to look into the implementation of `Console.WriteLine` instead. Click {gui}`Step Out`, or {kbd}`Shift + F11`, and the debugger takes us back to `Console.WriteLine` again – stepping out means “execute the rest of this function and go back to where its value is returned”.

Now, {gui}`Step Into` it again, and the debugger should take us right to the implementation of the `WriteLine` function itself. 
```

> You can keep stepping into the many functions that make up `Console.WriteLine` at this point to better understand how it works under the hood.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can keep stepping into the many functions that make up `Console.WriteLine` to better understand how it works internally.
```
